# A Verified DRUP Proof Checker

As the title suggests, a verified implementation of a checker for propositional unsatisfiability proofs in the  [DRUP format](https://satcompetition.github.io/2022/certificates.html) that is produced by many solvers.
The core of the checker is written in [Why3](https://why3.lri.fr/), which is extracted to OCaml, compiled natively, and exported as a C library with Python bindings.

* The checker also supports RAT clauses, so DRAT proofs are accepted.
* The current implementation is not optimized, and will be considerably slower than [DRAT-trim](https://github.com/marijnheule/drat-trim) on large proofs (see [performance](#performance) below).
* Accordingly, the frontend does not accept proofs in binary format.

The verification can be checked by running `src/librupchecker/rup_pure.mlw` in Why3. 
Most of the verification conditions complete with the `Auto level 0` tactic, and the rest either with a few levels of splitting followed by `Auto 0` or `Auto 1`, or simply with `Auto 2`.
It was developed using Why3 1.5.1, Alt-Ergo 2.4.0, Z3 4.8.6, and CVC4 1.8.
Verification has not been attempted with earlier versions of Why3 or the provers.

## Installation

If you use a recent Linux distribution on x86_64, you should be able to install the compiled wheel from PyPI:
```bash
$ pip install drup
```
Otherwise, you need to have OCaml (>= 4.12), Why3 (>= 1.5.1), and Dune (>=2.9.3) installed.
The most straightforward way to install these is to use [opam](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Install.html), which is available in most package systems, and then install Why3 and Dune (a sufficiently recent version of OCaml should already be installed with Opam): 
```bash
$ opam install why3 dune
```
If you do not intend to check the verification of the library or develop it further, then you do not need to install Why3's IDE or any of the solvers that it supports.

Once OCaml and Why3 are installed, make sure that Python `build` is installed:
```bash
$ pip install build
```
Then, clone this repository, build, and install the package:
```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/cmu-transparency/verified_rup.git
$ cd verified_rup
$ python -m build
$ pip install dist/*.whl
```

## Usage

### Command line interface

The package provides a command line interface for checking proofs stored in files:
```bash
$ drup --help

usage: drup [-h] dimacs drup

Checks DRUP & DRAT proofs against DIMACS source. 
Returns 0 if the proof is valid, -1 if not, or a negative error code if the input is invalid.

positional arguments:
  dimacs      Path to a DIMACS CNF formula
  drup        Path to a DRUP/DRAT proof

options:
  -h, --help  show this help message and exit
```

### As a C library

If you do not intend to use the Python bindings, then you will find the C shared object in the Python package directory:
```bash
$(PYTHON_PATH)/site-packages/rup/librupchecker.{so|dll}
```
The C library exposes wrappers around the core checker, which you can declare external in your C code:
```C
int check_derivation_from_strings(const char *dimacs, const char *cs);
int check_proof_from_file(const char *dimacs_path, const char *drup_path);
int check_proof_from_strings(const char *dimacs, const char *drup);
int check_step_from_strings(const char *dimacs, const char *c);
```
These functions return `0` if the proof is valid, `-1` if not, and a negative error code if the input is invalid.
Before they can be called, the library must be initialized with a call to `do_startup` passing the current `argv`, which calls `caml_startup`:
```C
int do_startup(char **argv);
```

### As a Python module

The Python bindings expose these same functions, but will call `do_startup` automatically when the package is imported, so there is no need to call it manually.
If the arguments given to the Python bindings cannot be opened (in the case of files) or parsed, then they raise `ValueError`.
If the proof is valid, then the Python bindings return `True`, and `False` otherwise.

As described, the package is straightforward to use:
```python
import drup

cnf = """
p cnf 4 8
 1  2 -3 0
-1 -2  3 0
 2  3 -4 0
-2 -3  4 0
 1  3  4 0
-1 -3 -4 0
-1  2  4 0
 1 -2 -4 0
"""

pf = """
1 2 0
1 0
2 0
0
"""

if drup.check_proof_from_strings(cnf, pf):
    print("Valid")
else:
    print("Invalid")
```

## Performance

At present, the implementation of RUP checking is not optimized, and drop lines are ignored.
Unit propagation does not take advantage of watched literals, and does not use mutable data structures.
Nonetheless, the performance compares well to that of [DRAT-trim](https://github.com/marijnheule/drat-trim) on small proofs (<200 variables, a few hundred clauses).

We measure this on random unsatisfiable instances generated by the procedure described in [[1]](#references).
To evaluate the performance of DRAT-trim without the overhead of creating and tearing down a new process for each instance, we compiled it into a library with the same `check_from_strings` interface as the C library, and called it using [ctypes](https://docs.python.org/3/library/ctypes.html).
In the table below, each configuration is run on 10,000 instances, with proofs generated by [Glucose 4](https://www.labri.fr/perso/lsimon/research/glucose/).

| # vars | # clauses (avg) | pf len (avg) | `drup (sec, avg)` | `drat-trim (sec, avg)` |
| ------ | --------------- | ------------ | ----------------- | ---------------------- |
| 25     | 147.7           | 7.3          | 0.001             | 0.085                  |
| 50     | 280.5           | 14.2         | 0.006             | 0.179                  |
| 75     | 413.5           | 26.3         | 0.022             | 0.217                  |
| 100    | 548.2           | 40.6         | 0.068             | 0.172                  |
| 150    | 811.8           | 102.7        | 0.407             | 0.326                  |
| 200    | 1079.5          | 227.9        | 1.916             | 0.292                  |

### References

[[1]](https://openreview.net/forum?id=HJMC_iA5tm) Daniel Selsam, Matthew Lamm, Benedikt Bünz, Percy Liang, Leonardo de Moura, David L. Dill. *Learning a SAT Solver from Single-Bit Supervision*. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.

## Acknowledgements

Many thanks to [Frank Pfenning](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~fp/), [Joseph Reeves](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~jereeves/), and [Marijn Huele](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~mheule/) for the ongoing insightful discussions that led to this project.